zgv 5.9 - a picture viewer for Linux/FreeBSD systems with VGA/SVGA.
Copyright (C) 1993-2005 Russell Marks.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


Roadmap
-------

The COPYING file contains a copy of the GPL described above.

README.fonts contains the copyright/license details for the bitmap
fonts (which are from X). It's pretty GPL-ish though, don't worry. :-)

The NEWS file describes the changes made since the last version - it
describes changes between versions all the way back to 1.3, in fact -
so if you're upgrading from an old version of zgv, be sure to read the
relevant parts of that.

ChangeLog is similar to NEWS, but more hacker-orientated. :-)

sample.zgvrc (in the `doc' directory) is a simple example
configuration file.

See INSTALL for installation details. (Or, in the binary distribution,
README.bin.) See SECURITY for an overview of the issues involved with
zgv having to be setuid root.


Description
-----------

`zgv' is an svgalib-based viewer which views GIF, JPEG, PNG,
PBM/PGM/PPM, TIFF, BMP, TGA, PCX, mrf, XBM, and XPM files, with a
full-screen file selector front-end. It can be used as a simple
command, with `zgv filename(s)', which bypasses the front-end. For
more on how zgv works and how to use it, do `info zgv' or `man zgv'
once it's installed.


FreeBSD problems
----------------

There seem to currently be some minor problems when building using the
svgalib backend on FreeBSD - see the INSTALL file for details.


Contacting me
-------------

You can email me at rus@svgalib.org.


Share and enjoy! 

-Rus.
